[SE-NNNN] Allow Property Wrappers on Let Declarations (#1910)
swiftlang/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-allow-let-property-wrapper.md

# Allow Property Wrappers on Let Declarations

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-allow-let-property-wrapper.md)
* Authors: [Amritpan Kaur](https://github.com/amritpan), [Pavel Yaskevich](https://github.com/xedin)
* Review Manager: [Xiaodi Wu](https://github.com/xwu)
* Status: **Awaiting review**
* Implementation: [apple/allow-let-property-wrapper](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/62342) 

## Introduction

> [SE-0258 Property Wrappers](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md) models both mutable and immutable variants of a property wrapper but does not allow wrapped properties explicitly marked as a `let`. This proposal builds on the original vision by expanding property wrapper usage to include let declared properties with a wrapper attribute.

Author: SE-0258 models immutable and mutable variants [here](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md#delayed-initialization). I wanted to make the distinction that we could manually set up property wrappers to behave like let wrapped declarations but this proposal would rid the need for it.

## Motivation

Allowing property wrappers to be applied to `let` properties improves Swift language consistency and expressivity.

> Today, a property wrapper can be applied to a property of any type but the rules for declaring these wrapped properties are varied and singular to property wrappers. For example, a struct instance without the property wrapper attribute can be declared with either a `var` or a `let` property. However, mark the struct as a property wrapper type and the compiler no longer allows it to be written as a `let` wrapped property:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, a property wrapper cannot be applied to a property declared with `let`:

```

Edits for clarity and brevity. There is no need to tell users that properties can be declared with `var` or `let`; it isn't necessary to specify that the containing type is a `struct`; and the language is ambiguous as to which of the two structures in the example is "the" struct being described—nor is it necessary.

Extra newline for compatibility with a wider range of Markdown renderers.

```swift
@propertyWrapper
struct Wrapper {
  var wrappedValue: Int { 0 }
  init(wrappedValue: Int) {}
}

struct S {
  @Wrapper let value: Int // error: property wrapper can only be applied to a ‘var’
}
```

> Permitting wrapped properties to mimic the rules for other type instances that can be written with either a `var` or a `let` will simplify the Swift language. Additionally, `let` wrapped properties would expand property wrapper usage to allow `nonisolated` wrapped properties and simplify property wrappers usage where the backing type is a reference type.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Removing this limitation would allow `nonisolated` wrapped properties (which must be declared with `let`) and simplify property wrapper usage where the backing type is a reference type. 

```

Extra newline for compatibility with a wider range of Markdown renderers.

The first sentence doesn't say anything concrete; it's already been stated a few sentences earlier that you're motivated by language "consistency and expressivity," so it doesn't need to be said again in the same section with different words.

## Proposed solution

> We propose to allow the application of property wrappers to let declared properties, which will permit the wrapper type to be initialized only once without affecting the implementation of the backing storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to allow the application of property wrappers to `let` declared properties, which will permit the wrapper type to be initialized only once without affecting the implementation of the backing storage.
```

> For example, the following is the implementation for a `@BoilingPoint` property wrapper:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider the following implementation for a `@BoilingPoint` property wrapper:

```

```swift
@propertyWrapper
struct BoilingPoint<T> {
  init(wrappedValue: T) {
    self.wrappedValue = wrappedValue
  }

  var wrappedValue: T
  var projectedValue: T
  
  func toFarenheit() {}
}

> struct Temperature {
>   @BoilingPoint var water: Double = 373.1
> }

Reviewer: It is confusing that what follows immediately in a code block introduced with the words "For example..." does not actually give an example of the proposed feature. I would remove this part of the example here entirely:

```suggestion
```

```

> The initial value for `water` is set using the `init(wrappedValue:)` initializer of the `BoilingPoint` property wrapper type. To ensure that `water` is not changed again, we could add logic to the `wrappedValue` setter to check if the property was already initialized and prevent re-assignment. However, this is an inconvenient solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial value for `water` is set using the `init(wrappedValue:)` initializer of the `BoilingPoint` property wrapper type. To ensure that `water` is not changed again, we could add logic to the `wrappedValue` setter to check if the property was already initialized and prevent re-assignment. However, this is an inconvenient solution that involves modification of the property wrapper implementation.
```

> Instead, we could declare the `water` property with a `let`, synthesize a local `let` constant for the backing storage property (prefixed with an underscore), and only allow the property wrapper to be initialized once, passing the assigned value to `init(wrappedValue:)`. Now, rewriting `Temperature`’s properties as `let` constants will translate to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, we declare the `water` property with `let`. The compiler synthesizes a local `let` declaration for the backing storage property, passing the assigned value to `init(wrappedValue:)`:

```

Not _could_ (a hypothetical): this proposal is about exactly allow this for real. This section needs to make clear what the _user_ is writing and what's synthesized.

```swift

> struct Temperature {
>   @BoilingPoint let water: Double = 373.1
> 
>   // ... introduces _water stored property
>   private let _water: BoilingPoint<Double> = BoilingPoint<Double>(wrappedValue: 373.1)
>   
>   // ... getter-only computed property
>   @BoilingPoint var water: Double {
>     get { return self._water.wrappedValue }
>   }
>   
>   // ... getter-only projectedValue property
>   internal var $water: Double {
>     get { return self._water.projectedValue }
>   }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
struct Temperature {
  @BoilingPoint let water: Double = 373.1
}
// ...translates to:
struct Temperature {
  private let _water: BoilingPoint<Double> = BoilingPoint<Double>(wrappedValue: 373.1)
  // getter-only computed properties:
  @BoilingPoint var water: Double {
    get { return self._water.wrappedValue }
  }
  var $water: Double {
    get { return self._water.projectedValue }
  }
}
```

Q: why is `$water` explicitly marked `internal`?

Author: This was accidentally copied over from the compiler output. I should have removed this.

```

> Declaring a `let` wrapped property of `water` of type `BoilingPoint` generates a `let` declared storage property of `_water`, a getter-only computed property that assigns the declared value to the backing property wrapper's `wrappedValue`. A let declared wrapped property also generates `$water`, a getter-only projectedValue property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This seems a repeat of the text and code above; therefore, would remove.

> The `let` declared property can also be initialized once via the generated storage property. For example, reusing the above example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `let` declared property can be initialized once via the generated storage property:

```

```swift

>   @BoilingPoint let water: Double
>   
>   init() {
>     _water = BoilingPoint(wrappedValue: 373.1)
>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
struct Temperature {
  @BoilingPoint let water: Double
  
  init() {
    _water = BoilingPoint(wrappedValue: 373.1)
  }
}
```

```

> After the `let` declared property has been initialized, attempting to reassign it will show an error. Clients can continue to manipulate the projection just like with `var` declared properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the `let` declared property has been initialized, attempting to reassign it will be an error. Users can continue to manipulate the projection just as with `var` declared properties:

```

```swift
  temperature.water = 400.0 // error: cannot assign to property: 'water' is a 'let' constant
  temperature.$water.toFarenheit() // converts to 212.0
```

> Property wrappers with `let` declarations will be allowed both as members and local declarations, as envisioned by [SE-0258](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md) for `var` declared property wrappers. All other property wrapper traits also remain unchanged from SE-0258.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Property wrappers with `let` declarations will be allowed both as members and local declarations, as envisioned by [SE-0258](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md) for `var` declared property wrappers.
```

## Detailed Design

> Marking a property wrapped declaration with a `let` makes that property a getter-only computed property and introduces a `let` synthesized stored property whose type is the wrapper type. This expands where and how property wrappers can be used in Swift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This sentence repeats the statements above. It doesn't seem to add any new information.

### Nonisolated property wrappers

> Actor methods and properties, which are inherently isolated to that actor, can be marked `nonisolated` to allow them to be accessed from outside their actor context. At this time, the `nonisolated` keyword cannot be used on property wrappers because `var` declared property wrappers generates a `var` declared backing property that is not safe from race conditions and so cannot be `nonisolated`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actor methods and properties, which are inherently isolated to that actor, can be marked `nonisolated` to allow them to be accessed from outside their actor context. At this time, the `nonisolated` keyword cannot be used on property wrappers because `var` declared property wrappers generates a `var` declared backing property that is not safe from race conditions and so cannot be `nonisolated`.

```

```swift
@propertyWrapper
struct Wrapper {
  var wrappedValue: Int { .zero }
  var projectedValue: Int { .max }
}

@MainActor
class C {
  @Wrapper nonisolated var value // error: `nonisolated` is not supported on `var` declared property wrappers
}
```

> Let declared property wrappers will now allow us to write nonisolated property wrappers as the backing property will also be stored `let` property. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal will allow us to write nonisolated property wrapper, as the backing property will be a stored `let` property:

```

```swift
@MainActor
class C {
  @Wrapper nonisolated let value: Int
  
  nonisolated func test() {
    _ = value
    _ = $value
  }
}
```

### Property wrappers with backing reference types

> A `let` wrapped property could be useful for reference types like a property wrapper class. Typically property wrappers are written for value types but occasionally a protocol like `NSObject` may require the use of a class. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `let` wrapped property could be useful for reference types like a property wrapper class. Typically property wrappers are value types, but occasionally a protocol like `NSObject` may require the use of a class. For example:

```

```swift
@propertyWrapper
class WrapperClass<T> : NSObject {
  var wrappedValue: T

  init(wrappedValue: T) {
    self.wrappedValue = wrappedValue
  }
}

class C {
  @WrapperClass let value: Int

  init(v: Int) {
    value = v
  }
}
```

> Even though  `value` is declared with a class type property wrapper, it can only be assigned once, preventing any future unintentional changes to the property wrapper class instance in this context. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Even though  `value` is declared with a class type property wrapper, it can only be assigned once, preventing any future unintentional changes to the property wrapper class instance in this context. 
```

Presumably, this is because the synthesized computed property is getter-only, is that correct? If so, it would be helpful to state it.

### SwiftUI 

> SwiftUI property wrappers may also benefit from a let declaration. For example, `@ScaledMetric` in its simplest usage can be written with a `let`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SwiftUI property wrappers may also benefit from a let declaration. For example, `@ScaledMetric` in its simplest usage can be written with a `let`:

```

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
  @ScaledMetric let imageSize = 10

  var body: some View {
    Image(systemName: "heart.fill")
    .resizable()
    .frame(width: imageSize, height: imageSize)
  }
}
```

Similarly, other SwiftUI property wrappers could be `let` declared when they do not require more than a single initialization.

## Alternatives considered

### @State and @Binding property wrappers with `nonmutating set`

Currently, SwiftUI offers two property wrappers,  [`@State`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/state/wrappedvalue) and [`@Binding`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/binding/wrappedvalue), that have a `wrappedValue` property with a `nonmutating set`. This allows the backing types to preserve the reference semantics of the `wrappedValue` implementation.

> A `var` declared `@State` property currently generates a nonmutating set that reflects `@State`'s reference based storage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `var` declared `@State` property currently generates a nonmutating set:
```

```swift
@State var weekday: String = "Monday"

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// ...expands to:
```

private var _weekday: State<String> = State<String>(wrappedValue: "Monday")
var weekday : String {
  get { 
    return _weekday.wrappedValue 
  }
  nonmutating set {
    self._weekday.wrappedValue = value
  }
  nonmutating _modify { 
    yield () 
  }
}
```

Declaring the `@State` property with a `let` will remove the nonmutating setter:

```swift
@State let weekday: String = "Monday"

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// ...expands to:
```

private let _weekday: State<String> = State<String>(wrappedValue: "Monday")
var weekday : String {
  get { 
    return _weekday.wrappedValue 
  }
}
```

> [There is an argument to be made](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-allow-property-wrappers-on-let-declarations/61750/20) in favor of retaining the `nonmutating set` for let declared `@State` and `@Binding` to signify their reference based storage. Afterall, a property wrapper's `wrappedValue` could be assigned via the `_weekday` backing property, even if `weekday` was marked with a `let` instead of a `var`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[There is an argument to be made](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-allow-property-wrappers-on-let-declarations/61750/20) in favor of retaining the `nonmutating set` here. After all, a property wrapper's `wrappedValue` could be assigned via the `_weekday` backing property, even if `weekday` was marked with a `let` instead of a `var`.
```

> However, we have elected to remove the `nonmutating set` for `let` declared `@State` or `@Binding` to maintain language consistency. Since property wrapper is just a struct or class with an attribute and a `wrappedValue`, a struct with a backing type of a class would not generate a nonmutating setter for its instances. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we have elected to remove the `nonmutating set` for `let` declared `@State` or `@Binding` to maintain consistency with the behavior of unwrapped properties with backing storage of reference type. For example:
```

```swift
class A {
  init () {}
}

struct B {
  var num: A

  init(n: A) {
    self.num = n
  }
}

struct Test {
  let b: B // note: change 'let' to 'var' to make it mutable
  
  var test: A {
    get { b.num }
    nonmutating set { b.num = newValue } // error: cannot assign to property: 'b' is a 'let' constant
  }
}
```

> Should SwiftUI or general property wrapper usage evolve in a different direction in the future, this decision can be reconsidered to propagate backing type traits to property wrapper declarations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should property wrapper usage evolve in a different direction in the future, this decision can be reconsidered.
```

I don't know what "backing type traits" are but it doesn't seem necessary to understand what's being described.
